gh-86482: Document assignment expression need for ()s (#23291)
python/cpython: Doc/reference/expressions.rst

   while chunk := file.read(9000):
       process(chunk)

Assignment expressions must be surrounded by parentheses when used
as sub-expressions in subscript, slicing, conditional, lambda,
keyword-argument, generator, and comprehension-if expressions.  They

> can only be used as is in if and while statements and in decorators.

Author: " and in decorators" must be removed in the 3.8 backport.

@gvanrossum Have there been any other changes that you know of?

Reviewer: I don't think so. The plan was to look for other places where the parentheses could be omitted without confusing either humans or parsers, but we never did that, and I don't think there are any pressing needs.

Author: PEP-572 mentioned the extreme possibilities of requiring parentheses always and only where the parser required them, with the first rejected because if and while uses, as in the doc examples, were thought to be most common.  For interactive use, augmented expression statements might be useful: a+= <complexe expression, to echo and bind to something other than _

Most of the sub-expressions requiring parentheses were pretty clearly better with them after I tried without. The most puzzling at the time is why  (a:= i+j for j in range(3)) is not allowed while [a:= i+j for j in range(3)] is.  If the ge is parenthesized, the parens for the ae look worse for me.  But I can imagine that since the ()s are not part of the ge, a no-() ae might be a parsing problem.  Even if not, this seems like a rare use since only the last value is accessible outside of the comprehension.

I recently used ass. expr.s for debugging (a use not mentioned in the PEP), to pull multiple values out a complex expression for a single debug print.  Positional arguments were easy; indexes required ()s.  The latter is probably the first extension of 'no () sub-expressions' I would want looked at.

Reviewer: Yeah, it makes sense for `a[i := f()]` and for `a[i:= f(), j := g()]` etc., though I would prefer to require the parentheses in slices (too many colons otherwise :-). Provided we can exclude it in slices, it should be a simple change to the grammar to support it in indexes. Maybe @lysnikolaou can help?

Reviewer 2: Yup, that's a very simple change to the parser. I'll have a PR ready later tonight.

> can only be used as is in if and while statements and in decorators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can only be used unparenthesized in if and while statements and in decorators.
```

Author: Agreed.  In addition, a list of unparenthesized subexpressions would be shorter: positional arguments in calls and single-value-expressions in set and list displays, including comprehensions, and parenthesized tuples. (Since ()s are not part of the tuple, the difference with ()s surprises me.)  Am incomplete list is still safe.

Reviewer: Can you just apply this so we can land it? You can file a new issue to allow more scenarios.

Also, can you double check that the difference for () and [] is not a regression in the new parser?

Reviewer 2: This is indeed a regression. I'll have a look at this as well.

Author: I see this in 3.8.6 as well as 3.10, so it is an oddity but not a regression.
```
>>> (a:=1, b:=2)
(1, 2)
>>> a:=1, b:=2
SyntaxError: invalid syntax

Reviewer: That's a different thing that what I was asking about -- I was asking about
```
[a := i for i in ...]
(a := i for i in ...)
```
The former is valid in 3.8 through 3.10, the latter in 3.8 but not in later versions (until @lysnikolaou fixed it earlier today :-). So that's definitely a regression.

The thing you show is due to a generalization of the rule that `:=` is not allowed at the top level:
```
>>> (a := 1)
1
>>> a := 1
  File "<stdin>", line 1
    a := 1
          ^
SyntaxError: invalid syntax
```
I wouldn't want to change that.

   while chunk := file.read(9000):
       process(chunk)

Assignment expressions must be surrounded by parentheses when used

> as sub-expressions in subscript, slicing, conditional, lambda,

Reviewer 3: The first one (subscripts) isn't true in 3.11:

```
>>> a = [1, 2, 3]
>>> a[x:=1]
2
>>> x
1
```

> keyword-argument, generator, and comprehension-if expressions.  They

Reviewer 3: genexps don't need parens in 3.11:
```
>>> (x:=3 for y in [])
<generator object <genexpr> at 0x102ae97d0>
```
They completely disallow assignment expressions for the iterable (not sure why):
```
>>> (y for y in (z:=[]))
  File "<stdin>", line 1
SyntaxError: assignment expression cannot be used in a comprehension iterable expression
>>> (y for y in z:=[])
  File "<stdin>", line 1
    (y for y in z:=[])
                 ^^
SyntaxError: invalid syntax
```

Reviewer: That's explained somewhere in [PEP 572](https://peps.python.org/pep-0572/#scope-of-the-target). "While it’s technically possible to assign consistent semantics to these cases, it’s difficult to determine whether those semantics actually make sense in the absence of real use cases."

Reviewer 3: Oh interesting, I think it's actually this part a few paragraphs down: "Due to design constraints in the reference implementation (the symbol table analyser cannot easily detect when names are re-used between the leftmost comprehension iterable expression and the rest of the comprehension), named expressions are disallowed entirely as part of comprehension iterable expressions (the part after each “in”, and before any subsequent “if” or “for” keyword)"

Reviewer: And so yet another wart in the specification was born... :-(

   while chunk := file.read(9000):
       process(chunk)

Assignment expressions must be surrounded by parentheses when used

> as sub-expressions in subscript, slicing, conditional, lambda,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
as sub-expressions in slicing, conditional, lambda,
```

> keyword-argument, generator, and comprehension-if expressions.  They

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
keyword-argument, and comprehension-if expressions.  They
```

> can only be used as is in if and while statements and in decorators.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
can be used unparenthesized in all other places, including ``if`` and ``while`` statements.
```
I don't think we need to enumerate all possibilities here; let's mention if and while as the most likely use cases.

> keyword-argument, and comprehension-if expressions.  They
> can be used unparenthesized in all other places, including ``if`` and ``while`` statements.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
keyword-argument, and comprehension-if expressions.  
In all other places where they can be used, parentheses are not required,
including in ``if`` and ``while`` statements.
```

   while chunk := file.read(9000):
       process(chunk)

Assignment expressions must be surrounded by parentheses when used

> as sub-expressions in slicing, conditional, lambda,

Reviewer 2: Unparenthesized assignment expressions in slices were implemented in #23317, so they are allowed since 3.10. Also, assignment expression need to parenthesized in `assert` and `with` statements.

Reviewer 3: Unparenthesized walruses are allowed in index expressions but not slices. This is current 3.12:
```
>>> x[y:=3]
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
NameError: name 'x' is not defined
>>> x[y:=3:z:=4]
  File "<stdin>", line 1
    x[y:=3:z:=4]
          ^
SyntaxError: invalid syntax
```

Reviewer 2: Correct! I mixed up indexes/slices. Sorry!

> keyword-argument, and comprehension-if expressions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
keyword-argument, and comprehension-if expressions
and in ``assert`` and ``with`` statements.
```
As @lysnikolaou pointed out

> keyword-argument, and comprehension-if expressions.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
keyword-argument, and comprehension-if expressions.
```
